console.context() explainer (#323)
MicrosoftEdge/DevTools: explainers/console.context()/explainer.md

> # DevTools contextual logging with `console.context()`

Reviewer: This explainer - as it modifies a web platform API - should be moving to the [MSEdgeExplainers repo](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers) rather than the DevTools repo.

Author: ah got it! i'll abandon this PR and open a new one under that repo.

   ```

   ❌ **This use case is not addressed. Extra effort and code is required for each and every message being logged.**

### Proposed improvements

We're proposing to improve the existing Chromium experience by making changes to the `console.context()` method and  by adding in new functionality in the Console tool.

#### Changes to the `console.context()` method

1. Add a second, optional `color` argument to `console.context()`.

   Syntax examples:

   ```javascript
   const myLogger = console.context("app");
   const myColoredLogger = console.context("storage", { color: "lemonchiffon" });
   ```

   Adding a color to a contextual logger instance will help developers easily find messages at a glace in the Console tool, without needing to filter out other messages.
   
   Giving developers the ability to specify a color at the logger level makes it easier, faster, and less error prone than what the current experience requires.

   If no color is provided, we propose assigning a random color that hasn't been used yet when the new logger instance is created. This will ensure that all context log messages are easily distinguishable.

> #### Changes to the Console tool UI

Reviewer: To this area, I suggest the following addition:

> **This section is non-normative.**
>
> *Conforming user agents are not required to implement this UI. It is explanatory for how console contexts may be used for the purposes of surfacing information to developer tools which consume console messages.*

# DevTools: console.context()

Authors:
 - *[Leah Tu](https://github.com/leahmsft)*, Microsoft Edge
 - *[Patrick Brosset](https://github.com/captainbrosset)*, Microsoft Edge

## Status of this feature

> This is available as of Microsoft Edge 79.

Reviewer 2: As a reader, unfamiliar with the feature, I might be confused by this. What about:

```suggestion
An initial version of this feature has been available in Microsoft Edge starting with version 79. This explainer proposes improvements to the feature.
```

## Introduction

> While debugging a large application, filtering through many console log messages can be challenging. If a developer wanted to group messages together, they could use console.group(), but it's possible that other unrelated logs could be included. Alternatively, they could append a group name before log messages, but this is tedious and time-consuming.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When debugging web applications with large code bases having many components from many different teams, it can be challenging for developers to filter through the many log messages that appear in the Console tool and find the relevant ones. Often, developers want to filter the messages so that only the ones from the component they're working on appear. For example, a developer might want to see the logs that are emitted by a given UI component only, or by a database utility module only.

Developers can use existing techniques that help with this use case, but these techniques have limitations:

* Use the `console.group()` API to group related log messages together.

  * However, this requires developers to always open the group before logging and then close it.
  * Also, unrelated logs could also get included into groups.
  * Finally, nested groups lead to nested log messages, which might not always be desirable if developers want to focus only on their component.

* Prefix log messages with a name.

  * This can be tedious and error prone. Developers can build their own console logging utility to handle this systematically.
```

## Goals

> The console.context() method provides a better solution for managing log messages. It returns a console instance that implements the console interface. Messages can be organized by logging to different contexts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our goal is to improve on the existing experimental `console.context()` method to provide a better solution for logging messages from a multi-component web app's code base, and more easily filter messages in the Console.

The `console.context(contextName)` method returns an instance of an object that implements the same methods as the `console` namespace. Developers can create different contexts for the different parts of their apps. Messages logged from a context object _belong_ to the context and can be filtered in the Console tool, currently by typing `context:contextName` in the Console's search field.
```

Reviewer 2: We will need a new section at the bottom of this explainer that describes the interface too. The context method is not standard right now (not in https://console.spec.whatwg.org/), so we need to write some IDL code to propose what the method would return, etc.

The main goals are:

> 1. Improve the debugging process by making it easier and faster to navigate console log messages with context-based grouping.
> 2. Improve the overall readability of the console.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Improve the debugging process for large web applications, by making it easier and faster to navigate many console log messages thanks to context-based filtering.
2. Improve the overall readability of the console.
3. Make it easy for developers to create contextual loggers, without requiring them to write their own utility code.
```

> ## Use case in DevTools

Reviewer 2: Is this section describing the current experience, or what we want to implement on top of it?

I think having a "Use case" section makes a lot of sense, but the part about specifying a colour, and the screenshots confuse me a little, because I don't know if this is what's already implemented, or what we're proposing to improve.

Maybe create two sections after the short description of the use case:

1. Existing implementation in Chromium
   ...
2. Proposed improvements
   ...

Author: I was originally intending to only show what's currently available today, but I like the idea of making two sections! Will update to that format

Developers can create multiple named contexts for different parts of their application. By logging messages to a named context, you can easily identify and follow the flow of a specific part of your application.

> In the DevTools Console panel, you can filter messages based on the name of the context. If a colour is specified for a context, the log messages will appear in that colour improving the visual clarity of messages from different contexts.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be great if `console.context()` accepted two arguments:

1. A mandatory `name` argument, for the context name.
2. An optional `color` argument, for the background color.

But, even if a color isn't provided, I would want contextual logs to still get a random color per context, making them even easier to find visually in the Console, without necessarily filtering out other things.

One use case is filtering out everuthing else than the context you are interested in. But, another use case is seeing all the logs, from all of the parts of your app, while still making it very quick to visually distinguish between the parts, thanks to a color and context name.

Reviewer 2: We'll also need to describe the UI in details. Console log messages can be quite complicated already. They can be logs, warnings, or errors, have background colors of their own, be grouped within named groups, or auto-grouped by the console if they are similar, etc. 
So we need to think about how contextual logs interact with these existing details.

I'd like to propose the following:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/05207342-d2e9-46d8-a10c-e437beec2226)

Making the context appear as a badge before the message makes it possible to show the context name, and color without having to change anything else about the message itself (which can continue being an error, warning, or log, can continue to be grouped, etc.)
The badge also makes it easy to quickly see the context for any message.

Reviewer 2: Oh, and we also should add a section that describes the changes we'd want to make to the Console toolbar UI for filtering. Typing `context:name-of-my-context` works today, but I'm hoping that this proposal improves on it by introducing a dropdown somewhere that lets you filter on your context names. This way, you don't even have to type the special filtering command.

Author: <img width="471" alt="console-sidebar-with-context-filters" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/315a9881-a9d8-4607-ae9a-ee694702a0d6" />

@captainbrosset This is what I was thinking we could do for filtering. Each context would have its own section and within a section it would be further filtered based on the log level. What do you think of this? Is it overkill to include the log level filters?

Reviewer 2: I think this is fantastic! Let's go with this in the explainer, and adjust based on feedback if necessary.

1. Create a specific logger instance for a part of your app:

`const myComponentLogger = console.context("name-of-my-component");`

2. Then log messages as normal, using your new logger:

`myComponentLogger.log("This is a log message from my component");`

`myComponentLogger.warn("This is a warning message from my component");`

3. For an even nicer experience, give your logger a color:

> `myComponentLogger.log("%cThis is a log message from my component", "background-color:lemonchiffon;");`

Reviewer 2: This is confusing because the color isn't given at the logger level, but at the message level. As a dev, I would have to use the `%c` syntax and specify the color for each and every message.
